1 Introduction
What started as a financial crisis in July 2007 in the U.S.
degenerated into a full blown global economic crisis in
subsequent months. A financial crisis, also known as a credit
crunch, occurs when there is an uncontrollable reduction in
money supply and wealth with people losing confidence
and refusing to honour their debt obligations. This creates
disincentives for further credit creation, and incites lenders
to recall existing loans. It was this phenomenon that was
unleashed with loss of confidence by investors in the value
of securitised mortgages including default on highly rated
financial instruments in the United States and the first run
on a U.K. bank in 150 years. Reverberations quickly spread
beyond financial centres in the U.S. and the U.K. to other
industrial countries in the world. What started in the U.S.
as a mortgage crisis has degenerated into a global financial
and economic crisis that compelled the United States Federal
Reserve, Bank of England and the European Central Bank to
inject unprecedented amounts of capital into the financial
markets. The question that begs itself for an answer is why
this crisis could occur in the 21st century?
2 Nature of the Global Economy
To fully appreciate the wider global implications of
the crisis, and its impact on the economy of Ghana in
particular, it is pertinent to outline the nature of the world
economy, especially the increasing interdependence among
countries on one hand, and the dependence of LDCs on
the industrialised countries in North America and Europe
as well as the emerging economies as major markets for
their primary commodities and suppliers of their final and
intermediate products. Referred to as Globalisation, this
increasing interdependence is the process by which the
people of the world are unified into a single society and
function together as such, in a global village. This global
village epithet connotes integration of world economic,
technological, socio-cultural and political forces across
countries, which are reflected in assimilation of national
economies into the international economy through trade,
foreign direct investment, capital flows, migration, and
the spread of technology. As a global village, globalisation
entails a huge variety of intertwined micro-processes that
denationalise what had been constructed as national. For
THE WORLD FINANCIAL CRISIS AND
ITS IMPLICATIONS FOR GHANA
Dr. Fritz Augustine Gockel
PARLIAMENTARY BRIEFING PAPER
1
example legal and regulatory policies in international finance,
political subjectivities, urban spaces, temporal frames a
variety of dynamics and domains have all converged across
countries. Many production processes, ostensibly, taking
place in the US have in actual fact been dismembered or
have been outsourced to firms across countries including
Ghana where pay checks or parking tickets to people in
the US are issued. The more active a country is in the global
village, the more severe is the effect of the crisis on that
country. As we see later, although Ghana is undoubtedly
part of the global village, its weak interdependency links
have so far shielded it from the frontline effects of the
crisis. To appreciate the full implications of the crisis for
a developing country such as Ghana, it is important to
understand the “true” causes of the current global financial
and economic crisis so as to be able to fashion workable
solutions to addressing the probable impacts of the crisis
on the economy.
3 Origins of the Crisis
The origins of the crisis lie in complex interaction of a
number of forces scattered across policy setting and
mistakes, market failure and regulatory failure in the
developed market economies.
3.1 Policy Setting and Mistakes
In the case of policy setting and mistakes, the five years
leading up to the first visible signs of the crisis in July 2007
were characterised by low real short term policy interest rates
following successful reduction in inflation and “disinflation
scares” in the US and EU. Both short and long term interest
rates virtually converged and market participants were able
to use both long term and short term credit interchangeably
without regard to when repayment was due. The market
became careless as several participants tended to use short
term instruments for long term purposes in the misguided
belief that the short term rates were going to be prolonged.
Furthermore, as the system was awash with all types of
credits, and even households that were previously not
creditworthy by acceptable standards (sub-prime borrowers)
were now given the opportunity to borrow heavily. At the
same time, global financial savings exceeded perceived
investment opportunities, which helped to depress longterm rates across the world. Global conditions remained
accommodating even when short term rates were increased,
thus still keeping real and nominal rates generally low.
Developing economies were able to build up larger reserves
to reduce external vulnerability and maintain stable value
of their currencies against the dollar. Indeed, Ghana was
also able to improve its gross international reserves with
massive foreign inflows and nominal appreciation of the
cedi between 2003 and 2006 paving the ground for the
redenomination which envisaged a one-to-one parity with
the US dollar on a sustained basis. In June 2004 the US
monetary authorities began to slowly increase its policy
rates, which peaked at 5.25% in June 2006. Long term
interest rates began to fall with bursting of the housing
bubble and a wild gyration of commodity prices as money
flowed out of assets like housing or stocks.
3.2	 Market failure: Rapid financial innovation
In the US rapid financial innovation and engineering were
promoted, making risk easier to trade and distribute with
securitisation (the process of aggregating similar financial
instruments, such as loans or mortgages, into a security that
can be sold or transferred or delivered to another party).
Financial assets of all sorts from credit-card to companies’
debt repayments were turned into securities and priced. As
a result of heavy subprime borrowing, homeownership rate
increased exacerbating house price increases and consumer
spending. Indications are that between 1997 and 2006,
home prices increased by about 124%. Unfortunately
however, with increasing loan default, housing prices
started falling with a domino effect, hence the crisis.
3.3 Market failure: Poor Underwriting Standards
The financial system was characterised by lowering
of underwriting standards and proliferation of credit
risk transfer instruments, which were driven in part by
assumption of frictionless and uninterrupted liquidity.
Credit rating agencies out-competed one another for
market shares by issuing ratings that did not reflect the risk
characteristics of the borrowers. Exploitative risk-shifting
took place at every stage of the financial engineering
process. Lenders collected upfront fees for originating and
selling poorly underwritten, and sometimes fraudulently
documented, loans and passed the risks along to investors
without accepting responsibility for subsequent defaults.
Consequently when the crisis was triggered by increasing
interest rates, the subprime borrowers were first to declare
their inability to honour their mortgage obligations.
3.4 Market failure: Risk models’ failure
There was widespread miscalculation by banks and investors
of the level of risk inherent in making loans to subprime
borrowers due to the fact that the lenders used statistical
models that were not able to differentiate different risks,
especially the risk profile of subprime mortgages. Not
surprisingly, bad risks were given triple A ratings while in
actual fact they should not have been entertained at all.
When house prices began to decline between 2006 and
2007, mortgage delinquencies soared, and securities
backed with subprime mortgages, widely held by financial
firms, lost most of their value. These massive losses have
considerably impacted the balance sheets of banks across
the globe, leaving them with very little capital to continue
operations.
3.5 Regulatory failure
Regulatory failure was manifested in too much faith in the
discipline of the market with high tolerance of weakening
underwriting standards. Mortgage lending standards by
financial institutions became lax, especially as each link
in the mortgage chain collected profits while believing it
was passing on risk. As each player made its money, the
regulatory authorities pretended as if the market was
allocating resources efficiently; credit rating agencies were
themselves unregulated in the pursuit of competition. Not
surprisingly, the policy makers and regulators were not able
to quickly bring themselves to the realization that what
they religiously believed in, the power of the invisible hand,
was actually strangulating the global economy.
2
4 Policy Responses to the Crisis by the
Industrialised Countries and G20
Interventionists and Protectionists Policies: To manage the
liquidity concerns and slowdown in the global economy in
general and their respective economies in particular, the
authorities in the US and many European governments
have taken unprecedented steps of providing extensive
liquidity, giving assurances to bank depositors and creditors
that include blanket guarantees, structuring bail-out
programs that include taking large ownership stakes in
financial institutions, in addition to establishing programs
for direct provision of credit to non-financial institutions.
Some countries are in the proceeds of re-introducing capital
controls as a policy of last resort in the event of extensive
bank runs and capital outflows. Monetary policy is being
redefined to move away from narrowly focusing on goods
prices to taking into account asset price inflation, and
prudential regulation that recognise systemic vulnerabilities.
In the United States, bastion of capitalism, the Federal
Reserve announced its readiness to pump an extra $1
trillion into the financial system by purchasing Treasury
bonds and mortgage securities to bolster the economy. The
U.S monetary authorities (FED) have already reduced key
policy interest rate nearly to zero, making the FED a buyer
of long-term government bonds rather than the shortterm debt that it typically buys and sells to help control
the money supply. Owing to the strong interventionist and
protectionist policies being used to address the crisis, many
analysts have declared capitalism and the mainstream policy
views associated with the Washington Consensus, dead.
Globally, Leaders of the Group of Twenty (G20) affirmed
at their London Summit April 2009 that the only sure
foundation for sustainable globalisation and rising
prosperity for all is an open world economy based on
market principles; effective, prudential regulation, and
strong global institutions.
The G20 pledged to do whatever is necessary to restore
confidence, growth, and jobs; repair the financial system
with improved capital adequacy guides to restore lending;
strengthen financial regulation to rebuild trust; fund and
reform international financial institutions to overcome this
crisis and prevent future ones; promote global trade and
investment and reject protectionism to underpin prosperity;
and build an inclusive, green, and sustainable recovery. For
the developing countries such as Ghana, the G20 agreed
to triple International Monetary Fund (IMF) resources to
$750 billion; support a new Special Drawing Rights (SDR)
allocation of $250 billion; support at least $100 billion of
additional lending by the Multilateral Development Banks
(MDBs); ensure $250 billion of support for trade finance;
and to use the additional resources from agreed IMF gold
sales for concessional finance for the poorest countries. All
of this together will constitute an additional $1.1 trillion
programme of support to restore credit, growth and jobs in
the world economy. Since the financial system precipitated
the global crisis, emphasis was placed on its restructuring.
Accordingly, the G20 resolved to establish a new Financial
Stability Board (FSB) with a strengthened mandate, as a
successor to the Financial Stability Forum (FSF), including
all G20 countries, FSF members, Spain, and the European
Commission. The FSB would collaborate with the IMF to
provide early warning of macroeconomic and financial risks
and the actions needed to address them.
Countries are also to reshape their regulatory systems so
that the authorities are able to identify and take account
of macro-prudential risks. Similarly, measures are to be
taken to extend regulation and oversight to all systemically
important financial institutions, instruments and markets
including, for the first time, systemically important hedge
funds. Other major recommendations are to:endorse and
implement the FSF’s tough new principles on pay and
compensation and to support sustainable compensation
schemes and the corporate social responsibility of all
firms;take action, once recovery is assured, to improve the
quality, quantity, and international consistency of capital
in the banking system. In future, regulation must prevent
excessive leverage and require buffers of resources to be
built up in good times; take action against non-cooperative
jurisdictions, including tax havens.
We stand ready to deploy sanctions to protect our public
finances and financial systems. The era of banking secrecy
is over. We note that the Organisation of Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) has recently published
a list of countries assessed by the Global Forum against the
international standard for exchange of tax information;
call on the accounting standard setters to work urgently
with supervisors and regulators to improve standards on
valuation and provisioning and achieve a single set of highquality global accounting standards; extend regulatory
oversight and registration to Credit Rating Agencies to
ensure they meet the international code of good practice,
particularly to prevent unacceptable conflicts of interest.
5 Implications of Global Crisis for Ghana
So far, the turbulence has been an industrial country
phenomenon; LDCs have not been at the centre, at least for
now. The impact on LDCs such as Ghana would be through
lower global growth with domino effect on developing
countries’ economic performance (real GDP growth),
declining external demand for Ghana’ exports, falling
commodity prices, drop in remittances and higher-priced
financial flows from the international capital markets.
5.1 Implications For Real GDP Growth
Although the global economy and the industrialised
economies have been experiencing GDP growth rates with
increasing unemployment, performance of the economy
of Ghana is still robust, and the growth trajectory that
emerged some five or so years ago still continues. For 2007
and 2008, real GDP growth rates were estimated at 6.3%
and 6.2%. For 2006, the growth rate was 6.2%. Hence,
Ghana’s economic growth appears not to be impacted
adversely by the crisis to the point of derailing the growth
trajectory, so far.
5.2 Commodity Prices and Export Performance
The prices of Ghana’s major exports are still holding out in
the face of weakening global economic growth and falling
prices in manufactured products. Total export earnings
for 2008 were estimated at US$5,275.33 million, up by
26.4% from the 2007 level. Cocoa exports rose from
US$975.7 million in 2007 to US$1,239.65 million in 2008,
which is some 67% increase. This was mainly on account
3
of increases in both volumes exported and realised export
prices. For gold, export earnings increased by 29.6% from
US$1,733.78 million in 2007 to US$2,246.25 million
in 2008. The growth in value was due to the combined
effects of price and volume as average realised prices
went up by 25.8% and the volume of exports increased
by 4.06%. The value of exports of timber products also
improved considerably to about US$309.0 million, from
the US$249.0 million recorded in 2007. While average
prices increased by 17.64% to US$554.09 million per
cubic metre, the volume went up to 557,663 cubic metres,
which is an increase of 5.5%. These good performances of
export earnings suggest a lagged effect of the global crisis
on Ghana’s exports or that the market is taking a flight into
commodities. Whichever of these options holds, Ghana
must start looking inwards to “domesticate” cocoa and
gold as linkages to the industrial sector
5.3 Exposure of Financial Sector and Implications for
Ghana Stock Exchange
Fortunately for Ghana, its financial exposure to the global
economy is limited. On the part of the private sector,
especially the banking system, the possible direct links to
the global financial crisis by Ghanaian banks continue to be
exposure to counterparties in the form of correspondent
balances and placements with overseas banks. Deposit
Money Banks (DMBs) correspondent balances at the end
of December 2008 were 55.46% of networth of banks,
which exceeds the 48.12% in 2007. These exposures are
within the internationally acceptable prudential limits. As
regards the Ghana Stock exchange, the crisis can only also
adversely affect it when foreign investors decide to liquidate
their shares. However, this appears not to be the case yet as
the Ghana Stock Exchange (GSE) has continued to perform
creditably. Indeed, the Bank of Ghana and GSE regulatory
framework is strong enough to pre-empt unprecedented
attacks on the GSE to disrupt it.
5.4 Effects on Remittances
As massive job cuts occur in the industrialised countries,
Ghana will not remain unaffected by declining remittances.
Remittances flows to Ghana have been increasing over the
years, from US$0.717billion in 2001 to US $1.83 billion
in 2007 and US$8.7 billion in 2008. The significance
of remittances in Ghana’s macro-economy and microeconomy cannot be overemphasised. Remittances are used
to shore up external reserves and manage exchange rate
stability. They are also micro aids to dependants, whose
poverty profiles would have been worse without them.
NGOs and charities, which are beneficiaries of remittances
have already scaled down their activities and shed labour.
Many of the real estate and constructional activities taking
place are from remittances. Consequently, any significant
reductions in remittances will have adverse effects at both
the macro and micro levels of the economy.
5.5	 Lower Budgetary Support through Official
	 Development Assistance
Official Development Assistance to Ghana is a critical source
of closing Ghana’s resource gap. Within the Multi-Donor
Budgetary Support (MDBS) framework, the development
partners provide about 20% of Ghana’s annual budget.
Indeed, virtually all major capital/development projects in
Ghana are undertaken with donor assistance. Any reduction
in donor inflows would therefore adversely affect Ghana’s
development agenda. It is therefore heart-warming to note
that the G20 has pledged some US$1.1 trillion for the IMF
to be used in financing low income countries faced with
the adverse effects of the crisis. However, it has yet to be
seen if this money is actually going to be disbursed; this is
the critical challenge for Ghana and other such developing
countries.
5.6 Implications for Ghana’s Chances to Borrow from
the International Capital Market
In 2007, Ghana issued sovereign bonds to raise
US$750million dollars from the international capital
market. This facilitated closing of the financing 2008
fiscal gap. With the global crisis, access to international
financing of fiscal gap has become extremely difficult and
on unaffordable terms. Government’s attempt to raise
US$300 million loan from the international capital market
to cover debt absorbed from the 70% stake in Ghana
Telecom sale to Vodafone for $900 million was aborted
because of stringent market conditions including some
27% cost of credit. Clearly, the resort to the international
capital market to finance fiscal deficits is no longer a viable
option under the prevailing global crisis condition.
6 Ghana: What To Do and Not To Do
Ghana has been able to weather the storm so far because
of the limited integration of the economy in the world
market. This cannot continue especially as government’s
development agenda envisages export-led growth
strategies, which necessarily calls for macroeconomic
stability.
Government would have to get more serious with
macroeconomic management if investors, both foreign
and local, are to be attracted into the country. Risk adverse
investors will increasingly discriminate against weak policies.
Macroeconomic stability for growth entails judicious fiscal
management. The fiscal slippage of 15% of GDP in 2008
was what engendered the acceleration of inflation and
exchange rate instability, which are both bad for investor
confidence. Monetary policy should be disinflationary and
should not accommodate expansionary fiscal excesses.
Government should develop plans for adjustment to
potential shortfalls in external financing, especially by
exacting value for money on the expenditure side, and
curtailing revenue leakages through administrative
efficiency. If Ghana must go to the IMF/World Bank, it must
be prepared with well-thought out programs underpinned
by strong economic arguments, just as the East-Asian tigers
did in their negotiation strategies.
The use of cheap money policy is not a viable option for
now. The industrialised countries are fighting consumption
deficiency while in Ghana the problem is low savings
with investment deficiency. The securitisation problem
that precipitated the crisis is not part of Ghana’s financial
superstructure. Financial stimulus or fiscal stimulus that
instigates further consumption is not desirable and would
rather send wrong signals to investors.
The regulatory authorities should learn from the policy
mistakes of the industrialised world; the market with
invisible hand will always work but may do so at times
4
by strangulation. Consequently, the regulatory and legal
environment must be strengthened to ensure that market
failures are promptly dealt with.
Bank of Ghana should enhance the capacity of the deposit
money banks to develop financial products that would
enhance intermediation of remittances and other inflows.
Furthermore, the regulatory authorities and policy makers
must, expeditiously, work on the removal of costs of doing
business to the private sector to enhance private sector
competitiveness.
Contacts
Friedrich-Ebert-Stiftung
P. O. Box KA 9722
Accra.
Tel: 021 772471,
 761535,
 772687
Fax: 021 772990
E-mail office@fesghana.org
Web: http://fesghana.org
ISBN: 9988-572-43-3
About The Author
Dr. Fritz Augustine Gockel
Economist and Senior Lecturer,
Department of Economics,
University of Ghana, Legon.
E-mail: fagocl2@yahoo.com
Disclaimer
The views expressed in this publication are not
necessarily those of the Friedrich-Ebert-Stiftung
or of the organisation for which the author
works.
5